---
layout: post
title:  "Defining Global Health"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Needed today are the novel ways of approaching global health in order to inspire public engagement on the global scale.<!--more-->

The linkage between Globalisation and health is not a new phenomenon. The Renaissance saw the cultural exchange of ideas, such as Avicenna’s The Canon of Medicine which became a pivotal text for Western medical knowledge up to the 17th century. The Triangular Trade and the Columbian Exchange have shown the movement of disease to be impervious to the wide expanse that is the Atlantic. Colonization has done its fair share in the spreading of disease beyond the borders, whether it be intentionally and unintentionally. The bubonic plague of the 14th century, China’s bubonic plague of the 19th – 20th century, and the Spanish Flu revealed boundaries at its weakest and in its most transparent state. With the growth of our larger civilizations, the continuing diaspora of populations blur the notion of “homeland.” Thus the narrative of global health is a movement from a dichotomy rooted in conflict of the other to a model that is increasingly inclusive of every interest. Today, it is common to see news of disasters or outbreaks immediately followed by critiques of international response - that immediate aid and relief efforts are expected from the international community is reassuring. Clearly, we can no longer be as Prosperos in the face of Red Death. More people understand that regional security is linked to global security and what determines this is their individual role as well as their country’s role on the world stage.

An examination of global health as discourse is important in dispelling the remaining boundaries constraining this rather generic term. Papers within the dialectic of global health such as Koplan et al. and Beaglehole et al. rigorously arguing for their own precise definition of global health instead show the elusive nature of the term more than anything. But must there be one definition? Or perhaps the better question is what isn’t related to global health? The ambiguousness of Global Health is perhaps its greatest strength. I argue that global health should be seen as a fertile medium for the discourse vital to maintaining the diversity of subjects and practitioners inhabiting the space. This elusiveness allows for the leeway to take in useful contributions as needed, letting it compete against the “antibiotic resistance” of language. If we subject the term to continuous debates and reimaginings, would we not find the outcome to be inherently imperative, a call to action? Discourse has moved from quarantine to a global model, and the current global health discourse pregnant with an entire spectrum of human experiences and research subjects. Our goals present health challenges as a continuum of interdisciplinary complements. If the problems of global health are to be approached holistically, why should we not also approach its discourse in the same way?

The discursive advantage to our open construction is the acknowledgment of its capacity for increasing levels of complexity. The challenges we face today – NCDs, aging, disaster preparation, social issues such as gender, poverty and inequality, issues related to development, disability, among a host of other subjects – are not so easily aggregated and are by no means easily described. In order to effectively define frameworks for ideal health outcomes, we should first identify the borders of our current scope and then look for potential areas of expansion. Aging, for instance, may be looked at with an eye on economics but in doing so also serve to bring social models and human rights models into perspective. Placing it within the context of the wider epidemiological transition leads to the discovery of possible lessons to be taken from the wider global and cultural levels. Younger nations can take solace in the fact that they are not growing up alone, so surely solutions can be found through collaborative engagement and comparative studies. Look at the glut of health articles today on the Icelandic diet or the Okinawan diet for the key to living long and healthy lives, and you will find a conversation that is transgressive in nature. In order to redefine preconceived schemas, we need to come to terms with the incredible breadth of discourse available for we have only just breached the surface.

Failure to consider what lies beyond what we may consider normal bounds is a failure in defining the problem fully. This is an internal, structural challenge to the global health problem. Global health can certainly be recast in such a way so that it encompasses that which is known and that which is yet to be known. The ever expanding topic of health implies a constant pushing of the boundaries as there are still discoveries to be made in the realm of human health. Consider the tropical rainforest regions where new species are discovered every year. According to NOAA, 95 percent of our oceans are still unexplored, and much of the Amazon is still unknown. It is amazing to think about the possible advances in medicine, the possible next big cure just around the corner. Of course the health of our rainforests can be conceived as a diverse system of associations: to be studied in matters of local food security or taking our associations further we can see its relationships to a host of other topics to deforestation, climate change, sustainability, etc. So the structure builds itself quickly through political, social, environmental, and economic considerations – its heterogeneous nature drives it like a perpetual motion machine. The beginnings of a causal loop has been shown, but it is merely an intimation of the entire picture. Further exploration would show it encroaching on other causal loops and proliferating through each successive dimension.

An active term allows us to approach challenges strategically. In reframing an issue like disaster preparation, insights arise from the manipulation of scope. Seeing disasters as human-centered events, in terms of human culpability, places the onus on the audience. The issue is thus demystified. If we can properly plan and act, then we can prevent the disaster. If we take this as our paradigm, we will find that global health challenges are firmly within our grasp. Disasters can be prevented. Global food security is achievable. The eradication of infectious diseases is possible. Despite broadness of our subject matter, we can still operate with confidence, immediacy, and urgency.

Properly defining the context is a precondition of any model. Global health requires a more equitable and inclusive international community that recognizes previously ignored populations. It is inconceivable that we could accomplish whatever standards of global health without the consensus of its individual parts. Global health should assert itself in the face of competing agendas. Our definitions must not be compromised. This will understandably require a redrawing of current definitions to take into account of how health interacts within the realm of international relations. It remains an unsettling fact that many countries today are more likely to respond to the criticisms of their international peers than the cries of their citizens. Global health must be able to address important criticism on how we should organize our guiding for regulating and reconciling the apparent contradictions between countries and within the strata of a particular society. And where there are organizational disconnects, we should seek to rebuild governmental and public connections.

If anything, global health is nascent. For it to succeed, one of the challenges that must be addressed is the adequate distribution and usage of global health for unequal populations. This is an example of an external complication. Language differences, for example, is an obstacle for the spreading of vital health knowledge among many indigenous populations. We should cultivate a variety of frameworks employing them accordingly to each unique situation. For improving the health of indigenous peoples, this may mean that a social and anthropological approach is used. Communication barriers to health exist for every social level. See the anti-vaccine movement. Cultural sensitivity is a pillar of global health. In order to reach the needs of our most vulnerable, we must make the effort to overcome such barriers. Global health hinges on our collective security. And who knows what ancient wisdom we may uncover? We thereby acknowledge that this newly founded relationship can be mutually beneficial to both sides. The process can only be democratic. Ideally, global health is defined communally through inclusive and participatory channels.

Flexibility needed to address internal and external difficulties of what the term entails. Discussions of global health prove that the demystification of global health can be a restless and elaborate task where the themes of public health are identifying the scattered determinants, each susceptible to their own discursive wandering. Additionally, the capacity for global health definitions to transcend beyond normal associations and the practical benefit of this conception is that it places the responsibility on the individual, each situated within a particular strategic vantage point.











References

Beaglehole, R. and Bonita, R. (2010). What is global health?. Global Health Action, 3(0).
Cdc.gov, (2015). CDC - History - Plague. [online] Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/plague/history/ [Accessed 15 Nov. 2015].

De Maio, F. (2014). Global Health Inequities. Palgrave Macmillan.

Frenk, J., Gómez-Dantés, O. and Moon, S. (2014). From sovereignty to solidarity: a renewed concept of    global health for an era of complex interdependence. The Lancet, 383(9911), pp.94-97.

Koplan, J., Bond, T., Merson, M., Reddy, K., Rodriguez, M., Sewankambo, N. and Wasserheit, J. (2009). Towards a common definition of global health. The Lancet, 373(9679), pp.1993-1995.

The International Longevity Centre - UK, (2011). Non-Communicable Diseases in an Ageing World. London: ILC-UK.
