<!-- ---
layout: post
title: "We talkin bout practice"
categories: writings
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<cite> We're sitting in here, and I'm supposed to be the franchise player, and we in here talking about practice. I mean, listen, we're talking about practice, not a game, not a game, not a game, we talking about practice. Not a game. Not, not … Not the game that I go out there and die for and play every game like it's my last. Not the game, but we're talking about practice, man. I mean, how silly is that? … And we talking about practice. I know I supposed to be there. I know I'm supposed to lead by example... I know that... And I'm not.. I'm not shoving it aside, you know, like it don't mean anything. I know it's important, I do. I honestly do...</cite>

THE IMMORTAL NAG, the bane of all humanity was famously pontificated by the poet of the court, Allen Iverson. Every school kid knows the dread of the first essay after summer break. That assignment seems to be the most impossible task at the moment, our mental sluggishness forestalling any attempts at constructing a coherent essay. But you know, as the fall turns, you do get back into the swing of things and soon find yourself able to churn out last minute essays the night before just like old times.

Being out of academia and growing old, the periods of inactivity get longer. That's where I'm at - at the cusp of business emails, inane pleasantries, and symbolic handshakes. What separates the masters from the majority? Their voice. A quality most artists spend half their lives looking for, and for the fortunate few, that which is channeled as easily as magnetism. Nevertheless,

Music, in my experience, is a little different then writing. A lot of times, I've been away from the keyboard for far longer, but when I return to the instrument, a phenomenon unfolds closer to innate-ness. First, an awareness of the separation between mind and body as I sit outside of myself marveling at what my fingers are doing.

There's only so much you can put off. Though you may return to what you were once before, you still lose time for development. That is the greatest crime.

Practice, yes, we're talking about practice. -->
